# Interesting changes for the 2013 Federal Senate election, Victoria.

In 2013 Ricky Muir won a seat in the Federal Senate representing Victoria. 

This example shows and example of how Helen Kroger could have won that seat instead of Ricky Muir
if she had persuaded some of her voters to vote for Joe Zammit instead of her.

Alternatively, it is an example of how a software bug, systematic scanner error, or
fictitious devious malicious hacker or insider
could have changed the outcome of the election in an inconspicuous manner. This could
be done either from the announced results to a new false scenario where Helen Kroger won,
victimizing Ricky Muir, or alternatively the malicious actor could have successfully
done the change, if in actuality Helen Kroger should have won but was successfully and
undetectedly victimized by vote changes. Either way, the changes all have the
following properties:
* Ricky Muir does not have his position altered on any ballots.
* If done in the direction to benefit Helen Kroger, each modification appears to hurt her.
* If done in the direction to victimize Helen Kroker, each modification appears to benefit her.
* No above the line votes are altered
* No first preference votes are altered
* Each ballot just switches the preferences assigned to Helen Kroger and Joe Zammit.
These properties make it very difficult for anyone to notice such a hypothetical malicious act.

Note again, I am in no way suggesting this happened. This is intended entirely as a 
start towards the important and non-partisan question of asking how difficult this 
would be to do and/or detect with the hope of preventing it in the future.

What is going on here is the following:

On count 223, the 3 candidates with lowest tallies are:
* Joe Zammit on 16,404
* Vickie Janson on 16,683
* Ricky Muir on 18,994
As the lowest, Joe Zammit gets excluded and 15909 of the ballots pass to Ricky Muir, who suddenly
has a much stronger position.

However, if Helen Kroger (who was on 391,818 at the time) were to give 2595 votes to Joe Zammit, then Joe Zammit would no longer
be the lowest at this point; Vickie Janson would be. Very few of her votes would pass to Ricky Muir,
and then Ricky Muir would still be behind Joe Zammit, and would be the next excluded. With Ricky
Muir out of the race, Helen Kroger would end up easily winning with an apparent margin of over 87,000 votes.

When I say *apparent margin* I mean the difference between the last person elected and the next highest
tally at the last count. This seems a reasonable way to get an estimate of the margin, although in this
case it is absurdly wrong as one vote change would be enough to revert to the original result of Ricky Muir winning.

This involves changing the *tally* by 2595 which can be done either as
* 2595 below the line ballots changed, some of which are first preferences.
* or 5276 below the line ballots changed, none of which involve changes to first preferences.

The reason for the larger number for the second case is that many of the ballots
have a fractional transfer value at this point.

## How to look at the alternative transcripts

The example file is `Federal Senate 2013 VIC_AEC2013.vchange`, which lists both the possibly changes,
and also the original votes.

The original transcript can be generated by
```bash
concrete_stv AEC2013 Federal\ Senate\ 2013\ VIC_AEC2013.vchange
```
producing a transcript file `Federal Senate 2013 VIC_AEC2013_AEC2013.transcript` 
which can be viewed in the [standard viewer](https://andrewconway.github.io/ConcreteSTV/Viewer.html)

The altered transcript using 2595 ballot changes can be generated by
```bash
concrete_stv --modification 1 AEC2013 Federal\ Senate\ 2013\ VIC_AEC2013.vchange
```
producing a transcript file `Federal Senate 2013 VIC_AEC2013_1_AEC2013.transcript` 
which can be viewed in the [standard viewer](https://andrewconway.github.io/ConcreteSTV/Viewer.html)

The altered transcript using 5276 ballot changes, no first preference changes, can be generated by
```bash
concrete_stv --modification 2 AEC2013 Federal\ Senate\ 2013\ VIC_AEC2013.vchange
```
producing a transcript file `Federal Senate 2013 VIC_AEC2013_2_AEC2013.transcript`
which can be viewed in the [standard viewer](https://andrewconway.github.io/ConcreteSTV/Viewer.html)

Note that the first alteration affects the first count of the transcript,
while the second does not.

## How the example was generated

The file `Federal Senate 2013 VIC_AEC2013.vchange` was generated from the file
`Federal Senate 2013 VIC.stv` of votes in the election by the command

```bash
change_outcomes --verbose AEC2013 --just-try 3000:10-28 --allow-atl true,false --allow-first true,false Federal\ Senate\ 2013\ VIC.stv
```

Note that this requires giving `change_outcomes` a hint. Without the hint, `change_outcomes` will usually
detect a similar possible result, but usually has some gratuitous transfers to Vickie Janson. It is surprisingly
difficult to detect such events, and the problem of computing accurate margins in STV elections is 
still unsolved.

## Copyright

This is based on data from the votes in the election from the website of the 
[Australian Electoral Commission (AEC)](https://www.aec.gov.au/). 
Derived from data [© Commonwealth of Australia 2017](https://www.aec.gov.au/footer/Copyright.htm). 
Licensed under [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0). 

There is no endorsement by any of the above organisations intended to be implied.

Thanks and kudos to the AEC for making the list of votes available for such analyses.
